---
layout: post
title: JDK 15 Security Enhancements
---

[JDK 15](https://jdk.java.net/15) was released on September 15, 2020! As with
my previous blogs for [JDK 14](https://seanjmullan.org/blog/2020/03/19/jdk14),
[JDK 13](https://seanjmullan.org/blog/2019/08/05/jdk13),
and [JDK 12](https://seanjmullan.org/blog/2019/03/19/jdk12), I
have compiled a list of what I think are the most interesting and useful
security enhancements in this release.  I have also grouped
them into appropriate categories (crypto, TLS, etc) which should make
it easier to find out what has changed in each specific area.
The [JDK 15 Release Notes](https://jdk.java.net/15/release-notes)
also contain further details on these and other enhancements.

The most significant security feature of this release is support for the
Edwards-curve Digital Signature Algorithm, which offers improved security and
performance over other signature algorithms. See the [Crypto](#crypto)
section for more information.

## Table of Contents
1. [Crypto](#crypto)
2. [PKI](#pki)
3. [TLS](#tls)
4. [Tools](#tools)

### Crypto

-   __Edwards-curve Digital Signature Algorithm (EdDSA)__

    JDK 15 now supports the EdDSA signature algorithm. This feature is
    defined in [JEP 339](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/339). The Ed25519
    and Ed448 algorithms are both supported.

    EdDSA was designed to be resistant to commonly used side-channel attacks.
    The platform-independent Java implementation does not branch on secrets
    and the timing is independent of secrets. 

    New standard classes and interfaces representing EdDSA keys have been
    added to the Java SE platform. The `SunEC` provider has been enhanced
    to support EdDSA for the `Signature`, `KeyFactory`, and `KeyPairGenerator`
    APIs.

    Here is an example from the JEP of generating an EdDSA key pair and
    signing some content:
  
    ---

        KeyPairGenerator kpg = KeyPairGenerator.getInstance("Ed25519");
        KeyPair kp = kpg.generateKeyPair();
        // algorithm is pure Ed25519
        Signature sig = Signature.getInstance("Ed25519");
        sig.initSign(kp.getPrivate());
        sig.update(msg);
        byte[] s = sig.sign();

    ---

    More details on this feature can be found in the JEP and the
    [CSR](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8190219).

-   __SHA-3 Mac algorithm support__

    The SHA-3 family of Hmac algorithms are now supported: `HmacSHA3-224`,
    `HmacSHA3-256`, `HmacSHA3-384`, `HmacSHA3-512`. SHA-3 is a digest algorithm
    that is considered as strong as SHA-2. Use the
    [`javax.crypto.Mac`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/15/docs/api/java.base/javax/crypto/Mac.html)
    API to access these algorithms, ex:

    <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
    <code>
    Mac mac = Mac.getInstance("HmacSHA3-256");
    </code>
    </div>

    This enhancement extends the support for SHA-3 in the JDK. In JDK 9, we
    added support for the
    [SHA-3 hash algorithms](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/287). And in JDK 16,
    we will be adding support for
    [SHA-3 signature algorithms](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8252260).
    
-   __The native elliptic curves have been disabled by default__

    The elliptic curves that are implemented in native C code in the `SunEC`
    provider have been disabled by default. These curves are no longer
    recommended and/or are not implemented using modern formulas and techniques.
    APIs that try to use one of these curves will throw an `Exception` with
    the message "Legacy SunEC curve disabled" and the name of the curve.

    To re-enable them (*at your own risk*), set the `jdk.sunec.disableNative`
    system property to `false`. For example:

    <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
    <code>
    $ java -Djdk.sunec.disableNative=false ...
    </code>
    </div>

    Note however, that if you re-enable them, they are still disabled by
    default when used in TLS, CertPath, or Signed JARs. See the
    [JDK 14 release note](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/javase/14-relnote-issues.html#JDK-8233228)
    for more information.

    The curves that are disabled by this change are:

    ---

        secp112r1, secp112r2, secp128r1, secp128r2, secp160k1, secp160r1,
        secp160r2, secp192k1, secp192r1, secp224k1, secp224r1, secp256k1,
        sect113r1, sect113r2, sect131r1, sect131r2, sect163k1, sect163r1,
        sect163r2, sect193r1, sect193r2, sect233k1, sect233r1, sect239k1,
        sect283k1, sect283r1, sect409k1, sect409r1, sect571k1, sect571r1,
        X9.62 c2tnb191v1, X9.62 c2tnb191v2, X9.62 c2tnb191v3, X9.62 c2tnb239v1,
        X9.62 c2tnb239v2, X9.62 c2tnb239v3, X9.62 c2tnb359v1, X9.62 c2tnb431r1,
        X9.62 prime192v2, X9.62 prime192v3, X9.62 prime239v1, X9.62 prime239v2,
        X9.62 prime239v3, brainpoolP256r1 brainpoolP320r1, brainpoolP384r1,
        brainpoolP512r1

    ---

    The following curves are implemented in Java, use modern techniques, and
    are not affected by this change: `secp256r1`, `secp384r1`, `secp521r1`,
    `x25519`, `x448`, `ed25519`, and `ed448`.

### PKI

-   __Two root CA certificates have been removed__

    The following root CAs have expired and are removed from the `cacerts`
    keystore in the JDK:

    1. AddTrust Class 1 CA Root

       This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?caid=1280) is owned by Sectigo
       and has the following distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=AddTrust Class 1 CA Root, OU=AddTrust TTP Network, O=AddTrust AB, C=SE
       </code>
       </div>

    2. Keynectis Root CA

       This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?caid=12294) is owned by
       DocuSign and has the following distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
           CN=KEYNECTIS ROOT CA, OU=ROOT, O=KEYNECTIS, C=FR
       </code>
       </div>

    Two other roots owned by Sectigo have also expired, but will remain in
    the `cacerts` keystore for now since code signing certificates have been
    issued that chain back to those roots and may still be in use with
    timestamped applications:

    1. AddTrust Qualified CA Root

       This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?caid=1277) has the following
       distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=AddTrust Qualified CA Root, OU=AddTrust TTP Network, O=AddTrust AB, C=SE
       </code>
       </div>

    2. AddTrust External CA Root

       This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?caid=1) has the following
       distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=AddTrust External CA Root, OU=AddTrust External TTP Network, O=AddTrust AB, C=SE
       </code>
       </div>

### TLS

-   __Support for the Certificate Authorities extension__

    The JDK TLS 1.3 implementation now supports the
    ["certificate_authorities" extension](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8446#section-4.2.4).

    This extension is used by a client or server to indicate what CAs it
    supports. This can help the receiver determine which certificate to
    use for authentication.

    This extension is always sent by the server if client authentication is
    requested. By default, this extension is not sent by the client. To
    enable the extension on the client, set the
    `jdk.tls.client.enableCAExtension` system property to `true`. However, be
    aware that there are some limits associated with the number of CAs that
    can be specified in the extension, see the
    [release note](https://jdk.java.net/15/release-notes#JDK-8206925) for more
    information.

-   __The `SSLSession.getPeerCertificateChain()` method has been modified to
    throw `UnsupportedOperationException`__

    [`SSLSession.getPeerCertificateChain()`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/15/docs/api/java.base/javax/net/ssl/SSLSession.html#getPeerCertificateChain())
    API is now a default method that throws `UnsupportedOperationException` by
    default. This API is deprecated for removal and should no longer be used,
    as it depends on the deprecated for removal
    [javax.security.cert.X509Certificate](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/15/docs/api/java.base/javax/security/cert/X509Certificate.html) type.
    Throwing an `UnsupportedOperationException` will help developers identify
    and remove any remaining usages in their applications.

    Applications should use
    [`SSLSession.getPeerCertificates()`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/15/docs/api/java.base/javax/net/ssl/SSLSession.html#getPeerCertificates())
    instead.

-   __New system properties for configuring TLS signature schemes__

    Two new system properties have been introduced that allow you to configure
    the names of the signature schemes used in the digital signatures of TLS
    connections. These properties can be useful if you wish to have more
    control over what signature schemes are enabled or if some signature
    schemes are not supported by another TLS implementation and are causing
    TLS handshake failures.

    1. `jdk.tls.client.SignatureSchemes`: supported signature schemes used on
        the client side. 

    2. `jdk.tls.server.SignatureSchemes`: supported signature schemes used on
        the server side.

    Each system property should contain a comma-separated list of supported
    signature scheme names defined in the
    [Signature Schemes](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/15/docs/specs/security/standard-names.html#signature-schemes)
    section of the Java Security Standard Algorithm Names Specification. For
    example:

    <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
    <code>
    $ java -Djdk.tls.server.SignatureSchemes=rsa_pkcs1_sha256,rsa_pss_pss_sha256 ...
    </code>
    </div>

### Tools

-   __The `jarsigner` tool now has an option to check certificate revocation__

    A new option named `-revCheck` has been added to `jarsigner`. If
    specified, it will check the revocation status of each certificate in
    the signer's certificate chain, and the TSA's chain if the JAR is
    timestamped. Here is an example:

    ---
        $ jarsigner -verify -revCheck HelloWorld.jar
        Contacting OCSP server at http://s2.symcb.com ...
        Contacting OCSP server at http://sv.symcd.com ...
        Contacting OCSP server at http://s.symcd.com ...
        Contacting OCSP server at http://ts-ocsp.ws.symantec.com ...

        jar verified.

    ---

-   __`jarsigner` and `keytool` now emit warnings if you are using weak
    cryptographic algorithms *before* they are disabled__

    These warnings notify you if your security artifacts are using algorithms
    that are weakening, but not yet disabled by default. This alerts you to
    potential security risks and also provides you with advance notice so that
    you can upgrade to stronger algorithms before those weak algorithms are
    disabled.

    In this version, warnings are emitted when SHA-1 or RSA/DSA keys
    greater than or equal to 1024 but less than 2048 bits are used. Here is
    an example:

    ---
        $ jarsigner -keystore ks -digestalg SHA-1 HelloWorld.jar signer
        Enter Passphrase for keystore:

        jar signed.

        Warning: 
        The SHA-1 algorithm specified for the -digestalg option is considered a security risk. This algorithm will be disabled in a future update.
        No -tsa or -tsacert is provided and this jar is not timestamped. Without a timestamp, users may not be able to validate this jar after the signer certificate's expiration date (2021-04-27).

        The signer certificate will expire on 2021-04-27.

    ---

    This change will also be backported to Oracle JDK 11, 8, and 7 in
    the October 2020 CPU Release and is listed on the
    [Java Cryptographic Roadmap](https://java.com/en/jre-jdk-cryptoroadmap.html).

-   __The `com.sun.jarsigner` APIs have been deprecated for removal__

    The [`ContentSigner`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/15/docs/api/jdk.jartool/com/sun/jarsigner/ContentSigner.html)
    and [`ContentSignerParameters`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/15/docs/api/jdk.jartool/com/sun/jarsigner/ContentSignerParameters.html)
    APIs in the `com.sun.jarsigner` package were previously deprecated in
    JDK 9, but now they are marked for removal and will be removed in a
    subsequent version of the JDK.

    These APIs were seldom used and there is now an alternate
    [`JarSigner`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/15/docs/api/jdk.jartool/jdk/security/jarsigner/JarSigner.html)
    API that is much more powerful and should be used instead.

    In addition, the `jarsigner -altsigner` option which depends on these APIs
    will also be removed in a subsequent JDK release and now emits a warning:

    ---
        $ jarsigner -altsigner path foo.jar
        This option is deprecated and will be removed in a future release: -altsigner

    ---
