---
layout: post
title: JDK 16 Security Enhancements
---

[JDK 16](https://jdk.java.net/15) was released on March 16, 2021! As with
my previous [blogs](https://seanjmullan.org/blog/), I
have compiled a list of what I think are the most interesting and useful
security enhancements in this release.  I have also grouped
them into appropriate categories (crypto, TLS, etc) which should make
it easier to find out what has changed in each specific area.
The [JDK 16 release notes](https://jdk.java.net/16/release-notes)
also contain further details on these and other enhancements.

Also, one other feature in JDK 16 that is not specifically in the security
libraries area but worth mentioning is
[JEP 396](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/396), Strongly Encapsulate JDK
Internals by Default. With this change, "packages that existed in JDK 8 and
do not contain critical internal APIs will no longer be open by default"
meaning they cannot be accessed by code outside the JDK. This is a great
improvement in out of the box security.

## Table of Contents
1. [Crypto](#crypto)
2. [PKI](#pki)
3. [TLS](#tls)
4. [Signed JARs](#signed-jars)

### Crypto

-   __SHA-3 signature algorithm support__

    The SHA-3 family of `Signature` algorithms are now supported for RSA, EC,
    and DSA keys. The algorithms for each key type are:
      - RSA: `SHA3-224withRSA`, `SHA3-256withRSA`, `SHA3-384withRSA`, `SHA3-512withRSA`
      - EC: `SHA3-224withECDSA`, `SHA3-256withECDSA`, `SHA3-384withECDSA`, `SHA3-512withECDSA`
      - DSA: `SHA3-224withDSA`, `SHA3-256withDSA`, `SHA3-384withDSA`, `SHA3-512withDSA`, `SHA384withDSA`, `SHA512withDSA`
    
    The EC and DSA algorithms also include algorithms using the P1363 format,
    by appending `inP1363Format` to the name.

    SHA-3 is a digest algorithm that is considered as strong as SHA-2. Use the
    [`java.security.Signature`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/security/Signature.html)
    API to access these algorithms, ex:

    <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
    <code>
    Signature sig = Signature.getInstance("SHA3-256withRSA");
    </code>
    </div>

    This enhancement extends the support for SHA-3 in the JDK. In JDK 9, we
    added support for the
    [SHA-3 hash algorithms](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/287). In JDK 15, we
    added support for the
    [SHA-3 hmac algorithms](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8172680).

-   __The SunPKCS11 provider now supports SHA-3 algorithms__

    The SunPKCS11 provider has also been updated to support SHA-3 algorithms,
    so if you use a PKCS11 implementation, you can now access these algorithms
    from your Java application.

    The complete list of algorithms is as follows:

    - `MessageDigest`: SHA3-224, SHA3-256, SHA3-384, SHA3-512
    - `Mac`: HmacSHA3-224, HmacSHA3-256, HmacSHA3-384, HmacSHA3-512
    - `Signature`: SHA3-224withDSA, SHA3-256withDSA, SHA3-384withDSA, SHA3-512withDSA, SHA3-224withDSAinP1363Format, SHA3-256withDSAinP1363Format, SHA3-384withDSAinP1363Format, SHA3-512withDSAinP1363Format, SHA3-224withECDSA, SHA3-256withECDSA, SHA3-384withECDSA, SHA3-512withECDSA, SHA3-224withECDSAinP1363Format, SHA3-256withECDSAinP1363Format, SHA3-384withECDSAinP1363Format, SHA3-512withECDSAinP1363Format, SHA3-224withRSA, SHA3-256withRSA, SHA3-384withRSA, SHA3-512withRSA, SHA3-224withRSASSA-PSS, SHA3-256withRSASSA-PSS, SHA3-384withRSASSA-PSS, SHA3-512withRSASSA-PSS.
     - `KeyGenerator`: HmacMD5, HmacSHA1, HmacSHA224, HmacSHA256, HmacSHA384, HmacSHA512, HmacSHA512/224, HmacSHA512/256, HmacSHA3-224, HmacSHA3-256, HmacSHA3-384, HmacSHA3-512.
    
-   __The default PKCS12 algorithms have been strengthened__

    The default algorithms used to encrypt certificates and keys and protect
    the integrity of a PKCS12 keystore have been upgraded to stronger
    algorithms.

    The following security properties in the `java.security` configuration
    file are now set to stronger algorithms based on PBES2 which use SHA256
    and AES-256:

    ---

        keystore.pkcs12.certProtectionAlgorithm = PBEWithHmacSHA256AndAES_256
        keystore.pkcs12.keyProtectionAlgorithm = PBEWithHmacSHA256AndAES_256
        keystore.pkcs12.macAlgorithm = HmacPBESHA256

    ---

    If you experience interoperability problems with an existing PKCS12
    keystore that has been protected using the previous algorithm defaults,
    you can set the system property `keystore.pkcs12.legacy` to load this
    keystore and read its contents using the older algorithms.

    This change is also targeted to be backported to Oracle's JDK 11, 8 and 7
    releases in July 2021 and is listed on the
    [Oracle JRE and JDK Cryptographic Roadmap](https://java.com/en/jre-jdk-cryptoroadmap.html)
    (see the row with the Action named "Upgrade the default PKCS12
    encryption/MAC algorithms").

-   __The native elliptic curve implementations have been removed__

    The elliptic curves that were implemented in native C code in the `SunEC`
    provider have been removed. These curves are no longer recommended and/or
    were not implemented using modern formulas and techniques.

    The curves that are removed by this change are:

    ---

        secp112r1, secp112r2, secp128r1, secp128r2, secp160k1, secp160r1,
        secp160r2, secp192k1, secp192r1, secp224k1, secp224r1, secp256k1,
        sect113r1, sect113r2, sect131r1, sect131r2, sect163k1, sect163r1,
        sect163r2, sect193r1, sect193r2, sect233k1, sect233r1, sect239k1,
        sect283k1, sect283r1, sect409k1, sect409r1, sect571k1, sect571r1,
        X9.62 c2tnb191v1, X9.62 c2tnb191v2, X9.62 c2tnb191v3, X9.62 c2tnb239v1,
        X9.62 c2tnb239v2, X9.62 c2tnb239v3, X9.62 c2tnb359v1, X9.62 c2tnb431r1,
        X9.62 prime192v2, X9.62 prime192v3, X9.62 prime239v1, X9.62 prime239v2,
        X9.62 prime239v3, brainpoolP256r1 brainpoolP320r1, brainpoolP384r1,
        brainpoolP512r1

    ---

    The following curves are implemented in Java, use modern techniques, and
    are not affected by this change: `secp256r1`, `secp384r1`, `secp521r1`,
    `x25519`, `x448`, `ed25519`, and `ed448`.

### PKI

-  __Several `java.security.cert` APIs that represent X.500 distinguished names
   as `String` or `Principal` objects have been deprecated__

   Representing distinguished names as `String` or `Principal` objects can
   cause issues due to differences in encoding or loss of information. Each
   of these APIs have alternative methods that represent distinguished names
   as `X500Principal` and/or `byte[]`. The deprecated APIs are:

   - [X509Certificate.getIssuerDN()](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/security/cert/X509Certificate.html#getIssuerDN())
   - [X509Certificate.getSubjectDN()](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/security/cert/X509Certificate.html#getSubjectDN())
   - [X509CRL.getIssuerDN()](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/security/cert/X509CRL.html#getIssuerDN())
   - [X509CertSelector.setIssuer(String)](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/security/cert/X509CertSelector.html#setIssuer(java.lang.String))
   - [X509CertSelector.setSubject(String)](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/security/cert/X509CertSelector.html#setSubject(java.lang.String))
   - [X509CertSelector.getIssuerAsString()](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/security/cert/X509CertSelector.html#getIssuerAsString())
   - [X509CertSelector.getSubjectAsString()](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/security/cert/X509CertSelector.html#getSubjectAsString())
   - [X509CRLSelector.addIssuerName(String)](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/java.base/java/security/cert/X509CRLSelector.html#addIssuerName(java.lang.String))

-   __Root CA certificates with 1024-bit keys have been removed__

    Five root certificates with 1024-bit RSA public keys have been
    removed from the `cacerts` keystore. Keys of this size are weak and
    are no longer recommended. The five roots are:

    1. Thawte Premium Server CA

       This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?id=1615980) is owned by DigiCert
       and has the following distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       EMAILADDRESS=premium-server@thawte.com, CN=Thawte Premium Server CA, OU=Certification Services Division, O=Thawte Consulting cc, L=Cape Town, ST=Western Cape, C=ZA
       </code>
       </div>

    2. VeriSign Class 2 Public Primary Certification Authority - G2

       This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?id=8948838) is owned by
       DigiCert and has the following distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       OU=VeriSign Trust Network, OU="(c) 1998 VeriSign, Inc. - For authorized use only", OU=Class 2 Public Primary Certification Authority - G2, O="VeriSign, Inc.", C=US
       </code>
       </div>

    3. VeriSign Class 3 Public Primary Certification Authority

       This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?id=42) is owned by DigiCert
       and has the following distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       OU=Class 3 Public Primary Certification Authority, O="VeriSign, Inc.", C=US
       </code>
       </div>

    4. VeriSign Class 3 Public Primary Certification Authority - G2

       This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?id=845596) is owned by DigiCert
       and has the following distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       OU=VeriSign Trust Network, OU="(c) 1998 VeriSign, Inc. - For authorized use only", OU=Class 3 Public Primary Certification Authority - G2, O="VeriSign, Inc.", C=US
       </code>
       </div>

    5. Thawte Timestamping CA

       This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?id=9031018) is owned by DigiCert
       and has the following distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=Thawte Timestamping CA, OU=Thawte Certification, O=Thawte, L=Durbanville, ST=Western Cape, C=ZA
       </code>

    This change is also targeted to be backported to Oracle's JDK 11, 8 and 7
    releases in July 2021 and is listed on the
    [Oracle JRE and JDK Cryptographic Roadmap](https://java.com/en/jre-jdk-cryptoroadmap.html)
    (see the row with the Action named "Remove root certificates with 1024-bit
    keys").

    The compatibility risk associated with this change is considered to be low.
    However, if users encounter issues, they can download the certificates from
    the links above and import them into the `cacerts` keystore, at their own
    risk.

-   __New Entrust Root CA certificate added__

    The "Entrust Root Certification Authority - G4" certificate has been added
    to the `cacerts` keystore.

    This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?id=713609039) is owned by Entrust
    and has the following distinguished name:

    <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
    <code>
    CN=Entrust Root Certification Authority - G4, OU="(c) 2015 Entrust, Inc. - for authorized use only", OU=See www.entrust.net/legal-terms, O="Entrust, Inc.", C=US
    </code>
    </div>

    This root certificate has also been added to the `cacerts` keystore in
    Oracle's JDK 11.0.9, 8u271, and 7u281 releases.

-   __New SSL Root CA certificates added__

    Three new root CA certificates from SSL.com have been added to the 'cacerts`
    keystore:

    1. SSL.com Root Certification Authority RSA

       This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?id=36499471) has the following
       distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=SSL.com Root Certification Authority RSA, O=SSL Corporation, L=Houston, ST=Texas, C=US
       </code>
       </div>

    2. SSL.com EV Root Certification Authority RSA R2

       This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?id=163978581) has the following
       distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=SSL.com EV Root Certification Authority RSA R2, O=SSL Corporation, L=Houston, ST=Texas, C=US
       </code>
       </div>

    3. SSL.com Root Certification Authority ECC

       This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?id=36499472) has the following
       distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=SSL.com Root Certification Authority ECC, O=SSL Corporation, L=Houston, ST=Texas, C=US
       </code>
       </div>

    These root certificates have also been added to the `cacerts` keystore in
    Oracle's JDK 11.0.9, 8u271, and 7u281 releases.

### TLS

-   __TLS support for the EdDSA signature algorithm__

    Support for the EdDSA signature algorithm has been added to the TLS
    implementation in the JDK.

    EdDSA was designed to be resistant to commonly used side-channel attacks.
    The platform-independent Java implementation does not branch on secrets
    and the timing is independent of secrets. JCE support for EdDSA was added
    in JDK 15 and specified in [JEP 339](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/339).

    The support applies to TLS versions 1.0 - 1.3 and is specified in
    [RFC 8422](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8422) for TLS 1.0 - 1.2 and
    [RFC 8446](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8446) for TLS 1.3.

    In particular, certificates with EdDSA keys or signed with the EdDSA
    signature algorithm are now supported and can be used to authenticate
    clients or servers.

    The following signature schemes are also now supported:
    `ecdsa_secp256r1_sha256`, `ecdsa_secp384r1_sha384`, and
    `ecdsa_secp521r1_sha512`.

-   __TLS 1.0 and 1.1 are now disabled by default__

    The TLS 1.0 and 1.1 protocols have been disabled by default, improving
    out of the box security. These protocols have various weaknesses and 
    are no longer recommended. See
    [the IETF Internet Draft (which will soon be an RFC)](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-tls-oldversions-deprecate/) for more information.

    Applications should be using the more secure TLS 1.2 or 1.3 protocols,
    both of which are supported by the JDK. However, if you encounter issues
    and need to get your application working, you can (at your own risk),
    re-enable TLS 1.0 or 1.1 by removing "TLSv1" and/or "TLSv1.1" from the
    `jdk.tls.disabledAlgorithms` security property in the `java.security`
    configuration file.

    This change is also targeted to be backported to Oracle's JDK 11, 8 and 7
    releases in April 2021 and is listed on the
    [Oracle JRE and JDK Cryptographic Roadmap](https://java.com/en/jre-jdk-cryptoroadmap.html)
    (see the row with the Action named "Disable TLS 1.0 and TLS 1.1").

### Signed JARs

-   __Signed JAR support for RSASSA-PSS and EdDSA__

    JARs can now be signed with the RSASSA-PSS and EdDSA signature
    algorithms. Support for these algorithms has been added to the
    `jarsigner` tool and the
    [JarSigner API](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/16/docs/api/jdk.jartool/jdk/security/jarsigner/package-summary.html).

    The `-sigalg` option of `jarsigner` now accepts `"RSASSA-PSS`", `"EdDSA"`,
    `"Ed25519"`, and `"Ed448"` as values for the signature algorithm.

    Here is an example of signing a JAR with the Ed25519 algorithm:

    ---

        jarsigner -keystore keystore -sigalg Ed25519 -verbose App.jar edkey
        Enter Passphrase for keystore: 
           adding: META-INF/MANIFEST.MF
           adding: META-INF/EDKEY.SF
           adding: META-INF/EDKEY.EC
          signing: App.class
    
        >>> Signer
            X.509, CN=edkey
            Signature algorithm: Ed25519, 255-bit key
            [trusted certificate]
        
        jar signed.
        
        Warning: 
        The signer's certificate is self-signed.
    
    ---
