---
layout: post
title: JDK 18 Security Enhancements
---

[JDK 18](https://openjdk.java.net/projects/jdk/18/) was released on March 22, 2022! As with
my previous [blogs](https://seanjmullan.org/blog/), I
have compiled a list of what I think are the most interesting and useful
security enhancements in this release.  I have also grouped
them into appropriate categories (crypto, PKI, etc) which should make
it easier to find out what has changed in each specific area.
The [JDK 18 release notes](https://jdk.java.net/18/release-notes)
also contain further details on these and other enhancements.

Highlights of this release include further improvements that strengthen
the default security of the Java Platform, support for new crypto algorithms,
and new alternative JAAS APIs that do not depend on deprecated 
Security Manager APIs. See below for more details on these and other
enhancements.

Several performance improvements have also been made in the crypto, TLS
and JAAS/Kerberos components. See
[JDK-8270317](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8270317), 
[JDK-8276660](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8276660), 
[JDK-8273299](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8273299), 
[JDK-8268427](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8268427), 
[JDK-8267125](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8267125), 
and [JDK-8273026](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8273026)
for more details.

Also, one other important JDK 18 feature that is not part of the security
libraries area but is definitely worth mentioning is:

- [JEP 421: Deprecate Finalization for Removal](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/421)

  This JEP deprecates finalization for removal in a future release. Finalizers
  can cause various security issues and require special care when using.
  More robust replacements and techniques are already available and are
  [listed in the JEP](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/421#Alternative-techniques).

## Table of Contents
1. [Crypto](#crypto)
2. [PKI](#pki)
3. [Kerberos](#kerberos)
4. [Security Manager](#security-manager)
5. [Tools](#tools)
6. [Signed JARs](#signed-jars)

### Crypto

-   __PKCS#11 support for AES Key Wrap and AES Key Wrap With Padding (KWP) modes__

    The `SunPKCS11` provider now supports the AES Key Wrap and AES Key Wrap
    With Padding (KWP) cipher modes if the underlying PKCS11 native library
    supports them.

    These standard modes are designed to protect cryptographic keys and
    are defined in [NIST SP 800-38F](https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-38f/final).

    This enhancement builds on
    [the enhancement in JDK 17](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8248268)
    which added and improved support for these modes to the `SunJCE` provider.

    Use these modes in your Java application with the `javax.crypto.Cipher`
    API with the algorithm transformations `"AES/KW/NoPadding"`,
    `"AES/KW/PKCS5Padding"` or `"AES/KWP/NoPadding"`.

    The JCE algorithm mappings to the PKCS11 mechanisms are as follows:

    ---
        AES/KW/NoPadding Cipher => CKM_AES_KEY_WRAP mechanism
        AES/KW/PKCS5Padding Cipher => CKM_AES_KEY_WRAP_PAD mechanism
        AES/KWP/NoPadding Cipher => CKM_AES_KEY_WRAP_KWP mechanism

    ---
 
    See the [PKCS#11 Reference Guide](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/security/pkcs11-reference-guide1.html#GUID-30E98B63-4910-40A1-A6DD-663EAF466991)
    for more information about PKCS#11 support in the JDK.

    Issue: [JDK-8264849](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8264849)

-   __New `KeyStore::getAttributes()` API__

    A new [`getAttributes(String alias)` method](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/docs/api/java.base/java/security/KeyStore.html#getAttributes(java.lang.String))
    has been added to the `java.security.KeyStore` API. This method returns a
    set of attributes associated with a KeyStore alias, or entry. Before this
    change, the attributes of an entry could only be obtained by calling the
    `getAttributes` method of a `KeyStore.Entry`. If the entry was a
    `PrivateKeyEntry`, the application needed to provide the proper password
    to unlock the entry, even if the attributes associated with the entry
    were not protected. This new API avoids that issue.

    A corresponding [`engineGetAttributes(String alias)`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/docs/api/java.base/java/security/KeyStoreSpi.html#engineGetAttributes(java.lang.String))
    method has also been added to the `KeyStoreSpi` class for providers to
    implement. If not overridden by a provider, the `KeyStore::getAttributes`
    method will return an empty set. Third party providers should add support
    for this API when adding support for JDK 18.

    See the [Key Management section of the JCA Reference Guide](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/security/java-cryptography-architecture-jca-reference-guide.html#GUID-AB51DEFD-5238-4F96-967F-082F6D34FBEA)
    for more information about KeyStores.

    Issue: [JDK-8225181](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8225181)

-   __A passwordless PKCS12 keystore is now easier to create__

    Passwordless keystores (a keystore with no password required to
    unlock it) are useful when the keystore is stored in a secure
    location and is only intended to store non-sensitive information, such
    as public X.509 certificates. With a passwordless PKCS12 keystore,
    certificates are not encrypted and there is no Mac applied as an
    integrity check is not necessary.

    Prior to this change, creating a passwordless PKCS12 keystore was
    difficult, and required setting various security properties. Now, a
    passwordless PKCS12 keystore can be created by simply specifying a
    `null` password to the `KeyStore::store(outStream, password)` API.
    The keystore can then be loaded with a null (or any) password with
    the `KeyStore::load()` API.

    Issue: [JDK-8231107](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8231107)

### PKI

-   __The `cacerts` keystore is now in PKCS12 format__

    The `cacerts` keystore, which holds the root CA certificates bundled
    with the JDK, has been converted from the non-standard JKS format to the
    standard PKCS12 format.

    This change has several benefits. It moves `cacerts` away from the obsolete
    JKS format. And it transitions `cacerts` to the PKCS12 format which
    supports a passwordless keystore -- this means that you no longer have to
    specify (or change) the default password "changeit", unless you intend to
    store sensitive material within it.

    See the [Crypto](#crypto) section for more details on passwordless
    keystores.

    Issue: [JDK-8275252](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8275252)

-   __OCSP responses support for RSASSA-PSS__

    OCSP responses signed with the RSASSA-PSS signature algorithm are now
    supported.

    Issue: [JDK-8274471](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8274471)

-   __Removal of Google's GlobalSign Root Certificate__

    The "GlobalSign" Root CA certificate is now expired and has been removed
    from the `cacerts` keystore. This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?q=14)
    is owned by Google and has the following distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=GlobalSign, O=GlobalSign, OU=GlobalSign Root CA - R2
       </code>
       </div>

    This root certificate has also been removed from the `cacerts` keystore in
    Oracle's JDK 17.0.2, 11.0.14, 8u321, and 7u331 releases.

    Issue: [JDK-8225083](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8225083)

-   __Removal of IdenTrust Root Certificate__

    The "DST Root CA X3" Root CA certificate is now expired and has been removed
    from the `cacerts` keystore. This [root certificate](https://crt.sh/?id=8395)
    is owned by IdenTrust and has the following distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=DST Root CA X3, O=Digital Signature Trust Co.
       </code>
       </div>

    This root certificate has also been removed from the `cacerts` keystore in
    Oracle's JDK 17.0.1, 11.0.13, 8u311, and 7u321 releases.

    Issue: [JDK-8225082](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8225082)

### Kerberos

-   __Weak encryption types (DES, 3DES, RC4) have been removed from the
    default list of Kerberos encryption types__

    The DES, 3DES, and RC4 encryption types have been removed from the
    default list of Kerberos encryption types. Note that these weak encryption
    types were already disabled by default prior to this release, and
    would not be used unless the `allow_weak_crypto` property was set
    to `true` in the `krb5.conf` file, but once that was done, any of the
    weak encryption types could then be used. With this change, in order to use
    them, you have to also specifically add the weak algorithm(s) that
    you want to use to the `permitted_enctypes` property (or alternatively, the
    `default_tkt_enctypes` or `default_tgt_enctypes` properties) in the
    `krb5.conf` file.

    Re-enabling these weak encryption types is not recommended and should
    be done at your own risk.

    See [the Kerberos 5 GSS-API Mechanism Guide](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/security/kerberos-5-gss-api-mechanism.html)
    for more information on the supported `krb5.conf` properties.

    Issue: [JDK-8273670](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8273670)

-   __The `krb5.conf` `default_checksum` and `safe_checksum_type` properties are no longer supported__

    The `default_checksum` and `safe_checksum_type` properties in the
    `krb5.conf` configuration file are no longer supported.

    The checksum type used in TGS-REQ requests is derived from the
    encryption type and therefore the `default_checksum` property is no
    longer necessary.

    The `safe_checksum_type` property specifies the type of checksum to use for
    KRB-SAFE requests and was never used directly by the JDK.

    Issue: [JDK-8274656](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8274656)

### Security Manager

-   __New APIs for Subject based authorization that do not depend on the Security Manager__

    In JDK 17, as specified in [JEP 411](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/411),
    the Security Manager was deprecated for removal. As part of that change,
    several Security Manager APIs were deprecated for removal, such as
    `AccessControlContext`. The JAAS `Subject::doAs()` and
    `Subject::getSubject()` APIs depend on Security Manager related APIs,
    even though they do not require a Security Manager to be installed to use
    them.

    These APIs are important for developers that want to write secure
    applications that authorize subjects and perform sensitive operations 
    based on their credentials. Thus, JEP 411 outlined plans to provide
    replacement JAAS APIs that did not have dependencies on Security Manager
    APIs.

    These replacement JAAS APIs have now been added to JDK 18.
    [`Subject::callAs()`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/docs/api/java.base/javax/security/auth/Subject.html#callAs(javax.security.auth.Subject,java.util.concurrent.Callable))
    is a replacement for `Subject::doAs()`, and
    [`Subject::current()`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/docs/api/java.base/javax/security/auth/Subject.html#current()) is a
    replacement for `Subject::getSubject()`. The usage of these new replacement
    APIs is similar and simpler than the previous APIs. For example, here is
    an example of code using the old APIs:

    ---
        Subject s1 = new Subject();
        Subject.doAs(s1,
            (PrivilegedExceptionAction<Void>)() -> {
                AccessControlContext acc = 
                    AccessController.getContext();
            Subject s2 = Subject.getSubject(acc);
            return null;
        });

    ---
     using the new APIs, this code now looks like:

     ---
        Subject s1 = new Subject();
        Subject.callAs(s1, () -> {
            Subject s2 = Subject.current();
            return null;
        });

     ---

     With the addition of these new APIs, the `Subject::doAs()` methods have
     been deprecated for removal. `Subject::getSubject()` was already
     deprecated for removal in JDK 17.

     See the [JAAS Reference Guide](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/security/java-authentication-and-authorization-service-jaas-reference-guide.html#GUID-2A935F5E-0803-411D-B6BC-F8C64D01A25C)
     for more information about JAAS.

     Issue: [JDK-8267108](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8267108)

-   __New default for the `java.security.manager` system property__

    JEP 411 also announced that we would be changing the default value of the
    `java.security.manager` system property from `allow` to `disallow` in
    JDK 18. This change improves the performance of applications that do not
    run with a Security Manager.

    The implication of this change means that applications that dynamically
    install a Security Manager (by calling `System::setSecurityManager()`)
    must now explicitly set the `java.security.manager` system property to
    `allow` on the command-line, for example as follows:

    ---
        java -Djava.security.manager=allow MyApp

    ---

    Issue: [JDK-8270380](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8270380)

### Tools

-   __New `keytool` and `jarsigner` `--version` option__

    A new option named `--version` has been to the `keytool` and `jarsigner`
    tools. If specified, it will print the JDK version that the tool is using.
    Here is an example:

    ---
        $ keytool --version
        keytool 18

    ---

    See the [keytool](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/docs/specs/man/keytool.html)
    and [jarsigner](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/docs/specs/man/jarsigner.html)
    tool specifications for more details about these tools.

    Issue: [JDK-8272163](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8272163)

### Signed JARs

-   __SHA-1 JARs are disabled by default__

    JARs signed with SHA-1 algorithms are now disabled by default. SHA-1 is
    a digest algorithm that has become increasingly weak and should no longer
    be used for digital signatures.

    With this change, maintaining compatibility with previously signed JARs
    was an important consideration, so the restrictions do not apply to
    SHA-1 JARs that have been timestamped before 2019-01-01. However, this
    compatibility constraint is subject to change so it is in your best
    interest to re-sign any SHA-1 JARs with stronger algorithms.

    If a JAR is signed with SHA-1 and does not meet the compatibility
    constraints above, then it will be restricted and treated as if it were
    unsigned. This applies to the algorithms used to digest and sign the JAR,
    as well as the signer's certificate chain and any revocation data such
    as CRLs or signed OCSP responses. If the JAR is timestamped, it also
    applies to the timestamp digest and the TSA's certificate chain and any
    revocation data.

    This change is also planned to be backported to Oracle's update releases
    later in the year -- check the
    [Java Crypto Roadmap](https://java.com/cryptoroadmap) for the latest status
    and targeted dates.

    The `jarsigner` tool has also been enhanced to more accurately detect and
    warn you if your JAR is affected by these restrictions. We encourage
    you to use this tool to see if your JARs are affected. Here is an example
    of `jarsigner` when used to verify a SHA-1 JAR that violates the
    restrictions (note that SHA-1 as the Digest algorithm is flagged as
    "(disabled)" and a warning is emitted by `jarsigner`):

     ---
        $ jarsigner -verify -verbose signed.jar 

                  57 Tue Mar 22 14:25:08 EDT 2022 META-INF/MANIFEST.MF
                 249 Tue Mar 22 14:25:08 EDT 2022 META-INF/SIGNER.SF
                2005 Tue Mar 22 14:25:08 EDT 2022 META-INF/SIGNER.RSA
         m  ?      1 Tue Mar 22 14:24:16 EDT 2022 A

          s = signature was verified 
          m = entry is listed in manifest
          k = at least one certificate was found in keystore
          ? = unsigned entry

        - Signed by "CN=signer"
            Digest algorithm: SHA-1 (disabled)
            Signature algorithm: SHA256withRSA, 2048-bit key

        WARNING: The jar will be treated as unsigned, because it is signed with a weak algorithm that is now disabled by the security property:

          jdk.jar.disabledAlgorithms=MD2, MD5, RSA keySize < 1024, DSA keySize < 1024, SHA1 denyAfter 2019-01-01

    ---
   Issue: [JDK-8269039](https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8269039)
