---
layout: post
title: JDK 21 Security Enhancements
---

[JDK 21](https://openjdk.java.net/projects/jdk/21/) was released on September 19, 2023!
As with my previous [blogs](https://seanjmullan.org/blog/), I
have compiled a list of what I think are the most interesting and useful
security enhancements in this release.  I have also grouped
them into appropriate categories (crypto, TLS, etc) which should make
it easier to find out what has changed in each specific area.
The [JDK 21 release notes](https://jdk.java.net/21/release-notes)
also contain further details on these and other enhancements.

Highlights of this release include a new API for KEM (Key Encapsulation
Mechanism) and a signature verification implementation of HSS/LMS
(Leighton-Micali Signature system with the Hierarchical Signature System).
Both of these are important initial pieces for providing Java applications
with the tools they will need to withstand large-scale quantum computer attacks.

## Table of Contents
1. [Crypto](#crypto)
2. [PKI](#pki)
3. [TLS](#tls)
4. [XML Signature](#xml-signature)
5. [Tools](#tools)


### Crypto

-   __Key Encapsulation Mechanism API__

    A new standard API for Key Encapsulation Mechanism (KEM) has been
    introduced in this release and is more fully described in
    [JEP 452](https://openjdk.org/jeps/452). A KEM is a modern cryptographic
    mechanism that uses properties of a public key to securely establish a
    shared symmetric key between two parties. KEMs are increasing in popularity
    and will be an important component of new algorithms being developed for
    Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC).

    The JDK includes an implementation of KEM for the DHKEM algorithm as
    defined in [RFC 9180](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9180#name-dh-based-kem-dhkem).

    The main new class in the API is [`javax.cryto.KEM`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.base/javax/crypto/KEM.html).
    The `KEM` API description provides an example of using the API:

    ---

        // Receiver side
        var kpg = KeyPairGenerator.getInstance("X25519");
        var kp = kpg.generateKeyPair();

        // Sender side
        var kem1 = KEM.getInstance("DHKEM");
        var sender = kem1.newEncapsulator(kp.getPublic());
        var encapsulated = sender.encapsulate();
        var k1 = encapsulated.key();

        // Receiver side
        var kem2 = KEM.getInstance("DHKEM");
        var receiver = kem2.newDecapsulator(kp.getPrivate());
        var k2 = receiver.decapsulate(encapsulated.encapsulation());

        assert Arrays.equals(k1.getEncoded(), k2.getEncoded());

    ---

    JEP: [JEP 452](https://openjdk.org/jeps/452)

-   __Leighton-Micali Signature (HSS/LMS) verification__

    The SUN provider now supports signature verification for the Leighton-Micali
    Signature (LMS) system with its multi-tree variant, the Hierarchical
    Signature System (HSS).

    Defined in [RFC 8554](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8554.html),
    HSS/LMS is a stateful hash-based signature system and is one of the
    signature algorithms that [NIST recommends](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-208.pdf) for
    providing protection against quantum attacks. It is believed that this
    algorithm will not be broken by large-scale quantum computers.

    New standard algorithms named "HSS/LMS" have been defined for `KeyFactory`
    and `Signature`. The "HSS/LMS" `KeyFactory` and `Signature` implementations
    only support public keys and signature verification. This is because
    the NIST recommendation requires that the key and signature generation
    be done on hardware. If you try to generate a signature, the `initSign`
    method of `Signature` will throw an `InvalidKeyException`. If you try to
    generate a private key, the `generatePrivate` method of `KeyFactory` will
    throw an `InvalidKeySpecException`.

    Issue: [JDK-8298127](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8298127)
    
-   __Support for PKCS#11 PBES2 password-based cryptography algorithms__

    The SunPKCS11 provider now supports PBES2 password-based cryptography
    algorithms for `Cipher`, `Mac`, and `SecretKeyFactory`. These algorithms
    use the PKCS#11 standard mechanisms for password-based cryptography. With
    this enhancement, it is now possible to use the SunPKCS11 provider for
    integrity and privacy protection with a PKCS12 `KeyStore`.
    The list of new algorithms for each service are:

    - `Cipher`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA1AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA224AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA256AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA384AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA1AndAES_256`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA224AndAES_256`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA256AndAES_256`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA384AndAES_256`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512AndAES_256`

    - `Mac`
      - `HmacPBESHA1`

    - `SecretKeyFactory`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA1AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA224AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA256AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA384AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA1AndAES_256`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA224AndAES_256`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA256AndAES_256`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA384AndAES_256`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512AndAES_256`
      - `PBKDF2WithHmacSHA1`
      - `PBKDF2WithHmacSHA224`
      - `PBKDF2WithHmacSHA256`
      - `PBKDF2WithHmacSHA384`
      - `PBKDF2WithHmacSHA512`
      - `HmacPBESHA1`

    Support for several additional PBES2 algorithms have also been added which
    do not yet have PKCS#11 standard mechanisms defined:

    - `Mac`
      - `HmacPBESHA224`
      - `HmacPBESHA256`
      - `HmacPBESHA384`
      - `HmacPBESHA512`

    - `SecretKeyFactory`
      - `HmacPBESHA224`
      - `HmacPBESHA256`
      - `HmacPBESHA384`
      - `HmacPBESHA512`

    Issue: [JDK-8301553](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8301553)

-   __Support for PBES2 Cipher and Mac algorithms with SHA-512/224 and SHA-512/256 digests__

    The SunJCE provider now supports PBES2 `AlgorithmParameters`, `Cipher`,
    `Mac`, and `SecretKeyFactory` algorithms with SHA-512/224 and SHA-512/256
    digests. The list of new algorithms for each service are:

    - `AlgorithmParameters`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/224AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/256AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/224AndAES_256`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/256AndAES_256`
    - `Cipher`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/224AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/256AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/224AndAES_256`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/256AndAES_256`
    - `Mac`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/224`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/256`
    - `SecretKeyFactory`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/224AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/256AndAES_128`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/224AndAES_256`
      - `PBEWithHmacSHA512/256AndAES_256`
      - `PBKDF2WithHmacSHA512/224`
      - `PBKDF2WithHmacSHA512/256`

    Issue: [JDK-8288050](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8288050)

### PKI

-   __Enhanced OCSP, certificate, and CRL fetch timeouts__

    Several new system properties have been introduced that allow you to
    control the connect and read timeouts for network connections related
    to certificate and CRL fetching, and OCSP:

    - `com.sun.security.cert.timeout`: for controlling connection timeouts
    when fetching certs from locations in an AuthorityInformationAccess
    extension of an X.509 certificate.

    - `com.sun.security.cert.readtimeout`: for controlling read timeouts
    when fetching certs from locations in an AuthorityInformationAccess
    extension of an X.509 certificate.

    - `com.sun.security.ocsp.readtimeout`: for controlling read timeouts
    when using OCSP to check the revocation status of an X.509 certificate.

    These new properties have a flexible syntax that allow timeout values
    to be specified in seconds or milliseconds. In addition, the existing
    `com.sun.security.ocsp.timeout`, `com.sun.security.crl.timeout` and
    `com.sun.security.crl.readtimeout` properties have been enhanced to use
    this syntax (previously they only supported seconds). The syntax allows
    timeouts in milliseconds to be specified as a decimal integer ending in
    `ms`, and in seconds as a decimal integer or a decimal integer ending in
    `s`.

    Here is an example of setting the `com.sun.security.cert.timeout` property
    to 100 milliseconds:

    `java -Dcom.sun.security.cert.timeout=100ms ...`

    Here is another example of setting the `com.sun.security.cert.timeout`
    property to 2 seconds:

    `java -Dcom.sun.security.cert.timeout=2s ...`

    Issue: [JDK-8179502](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8179502)

-   __New root CA certificates__

    Several new root CA certificates have been added to the `cacerts` keystore:

    - Four Google Trust Services (GTS) root CA certificates

      - [GTS Root R1](https://crt.sh/?id=3263026969) has the following distinguished name:

          <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
          <code>
          CN=GTS Root R1, O=Google Trust Services LLC, C=US
          </code>
          </div>

      - [GTS Root R2](https://crt.sh/?id=3448820660) has the following distinguished name:

          <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
          <code>
          CN=GTS Root R2, O=Google Trust Services LLC, C=US
          </code>
          </div>

      - [GTS Root R3](https://crt.sh/?id=3448822382) has the following distinguished name:

          <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
          <code>
          CN=GTS Root R3, O=Google Trust Services LLC, C=US
          </code>
          </div>

      - [GTS Root R4](https://crt.sh/?id=3263026968) has the following distinguished name:

          <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
          <code>
          CN=GTS Root R4, O=Google Trust Services LLC, C=US
          </code>
          </div>

      These root certificates have also been added to the `cacerts` keystore in
      Oracle's JDK 20.0.2, 17.0.8, 11.0.20, 8u381, and 7u391 releases.

      Issue: [JDK-8307134](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8307134)

    - [TWCA Global Root CA](https://crt.sh/?id=8559119) has the following distinguished name:

        <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
        <code>
        CN=TWCA Global Root CA, OU=Root CA, O=TAIWAN-CA, C=TW
        </code>
        </div>

      This root certificate has also been added to the `cacerts` keystore in
      Oracle's JDK 20.0.2, 17.0.8, 11.0.20, 8u381, and 7u391 releases.

      Issue: [JDK-8305975](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8305975)

    -  Two Microsoft root CA certificates

       - [Microsoft ECC Root CA 2017](https://crt.sh/?id=2565145421) has the following distinguished name:

          <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
          <code>
          CN=Microsoft ECC Root Certificate Authority 2017, O=Microsoft Corporation, C=US
          </code>
          </div>

       - [Microsoft RSA Root CA 2017](https://crt.sh/?id=2565151295) has the following distinguished name:

          <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
          <code>
          CN=Microsoft RSA Root Certificate Authority 2017, O=Microsoft Corporation, C=US
          </code>
          </div>

        These root certificates have also been added to the `cacerts` keystore in
        Oracle's JDK 20.0.2, 17.0.8, 11.0.20, 8u381, and 7u391 releases.

        Issue: [JDK-8304760](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8304760)

    - [Certigna Root CA](https://crt.sh/?id=8559119) has the following distinguished name:

       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=Certigna, O=Dhimyotis, C=FR
       </code>
       </div>

      This root certificate has also been added to the `cacerts` keystore in
      Oracle's JDK 20.0.1, 17.0.7, 11.0.19, 8u371, and 7u381 releases.

      Issue: [JDK-8245654](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8245654)

### TLS

-   __The default Diffie-Hellman group size has been increased from 1024 bits
    to 2048 bits__

    The JDK implementations of TLS 1.0, 1.1, and 1.2 now use a default
    Diffie Hellman keysize of 2048 bits when a TLS_DHE cipher suite is
    negotiated *and* either the client or server do not support FFDHE,
    which can be used to negotiate a stronger keysize. The JDK TLS
    implementation supports FFDHE and it is enabled by default; however the
    peer that the JDK is negotiating a TLS session with may not support it.

    As a workaround, users can revert to the previous size by setting the
    `jdk.tls.ephemeralDHKeySize` system property to 1024, but this is not
    recommended and should be done at your own risk. Also, while this
    change also applies to TLS 1.0 and 1.1, those protocols are no longer
    recommended and are disabled by default.

    This change does not affect TLS 1.3 as the minimum DH group size is
    already 2048 bits.

    This change is also listed on the [Java Cryptographic Roadmap](https://www.java.com/en/jre-jdk-cryptoroadmap.html) and is
    targeted for Oracle's October 2023 JDK releases for 21u, 17u, 11u, and 8u.

    Issue: [JDK-8301700](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8301700)

### XML Signature

-   __Support for the EdDSA signature algorithm__

    The JDK XML Signature implementation now supports [the Edwards-Curve Digital
    Signature Algorithm (EdDSA)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EdDSA), which
    means that XML Signatures can now be signed or verified with the EdDSA
    algorithm.
    
    Two new standard `SignatureMethod` URIs have also been added:

    - [`SignatureMethod.ED25519`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.xml.crypto/javax/xml/crypto/dsig/SignatureMethod.html#ED25519): URI
      representing the Edwards-Curve signature algorithm with Ed25519.
    - [`SignatureMethod.ED448`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.xml.crypto/javax/xml/crypto/dsig/SignatureMethod.html#ED448): URI
      representing the Edwards-Curve signature algorithm with Ed448.

    Issue: [JDK-8305972](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8305972)

-   __New system property to toggle XML Signature secure validation mode__

    A new [system property named `org.jcp.xml.dsig.secureValidation`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.xml.crypto/javax/xml/crypto/dsig/dom/DOMValidateContext.html#org.jcp.xml.dsig.secureValidation)
    has been added that allows you to more easily enable or disable the XML
    Signature secure processing mode. The property should be set to "true" to
    enable or "false" to disable.

    Note that the secure processing mode is enabled by default, and provides
    additional security by restricting weak algorithms and other potentially
    unsafe constructs in XML signatures. See the
    `jdk.xml.dsig.secureValidationPolicy` security property in the
    `java.security` file for more details.

    There may be circumstances where you may need to disable the secure
    processing mode (for example, to verify a legacy signature that uses a weak
    algorithm), but in general disabling the secure processing mode is not
    recommended and should be done at your own risk.

    Issue: [JDK-8301260](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8301260)

-   __New security property to enable or disable support for the `here()` function__

    The [`here()` function](https://www.w3.org/TR/xmldsig-core1/#function-here) is an XPath function defined by the W3C Recommendation
    for XML Signature that can be used to help select node-sets for use in
    XPath transforms. However, the `here()` function is not a standard XPath
    function and is not supported by the standard Java XPath API, and supporting    it requires an implementation-specific dependency on Xalan internal APIs.
    We intend to eventually disable support for this function by default.

    With this release, we have added a new security property named
    `jdk.xml.dsig.hereFunctionSupported` and set its default value to `true`
    (which means the `here()` function is still supported by default). We
    encourage users to set this property to `false` and test their
    applications to see if anything breaks. 

    Issue: [JDK-8305972](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8305972)

### Tools

-   __keytool now warns if weak PBE algorithms are used__

    The `keytool` utility now emits warnings if weak password-based encryption
    (PBE) algorithms are specified with the `-genseckey` or `-importpass`
    options.

    Here is an example showing this warning when using `keytool -genseckey` with
    a weak PBE algorithm (in this case, "PBEwithMD5andDES"):

    ---
        $ keytool -genseckey -keystore ks -keyalg PBEwithMD5andDES
        Enter keystore password:  
        Enter the password to be stored:  
        Re-enter password: 

        Warning:
        The generated secret key uses the PBEwithMD5andDES algorithm which is considered a security risk.

    ---

    Issue: [JDK-8286907](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8286907)

-   __The jarsigner -altsigner and -altsignerpath options are removed__

    The `-altsigner` and `-altsignerpath` options have been removed from the
    `jarsigner` utility. The `com.sun.jarsigner.ContentSigner` and
    `com.sun.jarsigner.ContentSignerParameters` APIs, which these options
    depended on, have also been removed. These APIs were originally
    deprecated in JDK 9 and marked for removal in JDK 15. There is an alternate
    [`JarSigner`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/15/docs/api/jdk.jartool/jdk/security/jarsigner/JarSigner.html)
    API that is much more powerful and should be used instead.

    Running `jarsigner` with one of these options (ex: `-altsigner`) now
    produces the following error:

    ---
        $ jarsigner -altsigner
        Illegal option: -altsigner

        Please type jarsigner --help for usage

    ---

    Issue: [JDK-8303410](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8303410)
