---
layout: post
title: JDK 22 Security Enhancements
---

[JDK 22](https://openjdk.java.net/projects/jdk/22/) was released on March 19, 2024!
As with my previous [blogs](https://seanjmullan.org/blog/), I
have compiled a list of what I think are the most interesting and useful
security enhancements in this release.  I have also grouped
them into appropriate categories (crypto, TLS, etc) which should make
it easier to find out what has changed in each specific area.
The [JDK 22 release notes](https://jdk.java.net/22/release-notes)
also contain further details on these and other enhancements.

Highlights of this release include a new `security` category for the
`java -XshowSettings` option and several new root CA certificates.

## Table of Contents
1. [Crypto](#crypto)
2. [PKI](#pki)
3. [TLS](#tls)
4. [XML Signature](#xml-signature)
5. [Tools](#tools)


### Crypto

-   __New java.security.AsymmetricKey interface__

    A new standard interface named
    [`java.security.AsymmetricKey`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/security/AsymmetricKey.html)
    has been added. `AsymmetricKey` is a subinterface of `java.security.Key`
    and represents an asymmetric key, which can either be a private or public
    key. The existing `java.security.PublicKey` and `java.security.PrivateKey`
    classes have been retrofitted to be subinterfaces of `AsymmetricKey`.

    The `AsymmetricKey` interface provides a default implementation of the
    `getParams` method which returns `null`.

    All asymmetric key subclasses now have a `getParams` method. This has two
    primary benefits:

     - Application code can retrieve parameters from a public or private key
       without using `instanceof` to first determine the subclass.
     - Many asymmetric algorithm parameters can be represented using the
       existing [`NamedParameterSpec`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/security/spec/NamedParameterSpec.html)
       subclass. As future asymmetric algorithms are introduced, the
       `AsymmetricKey` interface will allow earlier versions of Java SE to
       more easily support new asymmetric algorithms that can represent their
       parameters as a `NamedParameterSpec`, thus avoiding the need to
       introduce new algorithm-specific `AlgorithmParameterSpec` APIs.

    Issue: [JDK-8318096](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8318096)

-   __The jdk.crypto.ec module has been subsumed into java.base__

    The `jdk.crypto.ec` module is now deprecated with the intent to eventually
    remove it. All of the code in the `jdk.crypto.ec` module has been moved
    into the `java.base` module. This includes the `SunEC` security provider.
    The `jdk.crypto.ec` module still exists, but it is now empty.

    This change will make it easier for users to deploy applications that
    depend on elliptic curve cryptographic algorithms.

    Issue: [JDK-8308398](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8308398)

### PKI

-   __New root CA certificates__

    Several new root CA certificates have been added to the `cacerts` keystore:

    - Three eMudhra Technologies root CA certificates
      - [emSign Root CA - G1](https://crt.sh/?caid=96590) has the following distinguished name:  
          <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
          <code>
          CN=emSign Root CA - G1, O=eMudhra Technologies Limited, OU=emSign PKI, C=IN
          </code>
          </div>
      - [emSign Root CA - G2](https://crt.sh/?caid=96589) has the following distinguished name:  
          <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
          <code>
          CN=emSign Root CA - G2, O=eMudhra Technologies Limited, OU=emSign PKI, C=IN
          </code>
          </div>
      - [emSign ECC Root CA - G3](https://crt.sh/?caid=96593) has the following distinguished name:  
          <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
          <code>
          CN=emSign ECC Root CA - G3, O=eMudhra Technologies Limited, OU=emSign PKI, C=IN
          </code>
          </div>

      Issue: [JDK-8319187](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8319187)

    - Four DigiCert root CA certificates
      - [DigiCert TLS RSA4096 Root G5](https://crt.sh/?caid=207461) has the following distinguished name:
        <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
        <code>
        CN=DigiCert TLS RSA4096 Root G5, O="DigiCert, Inc.", C=US
        </code>
        </div>
      - [DigiCert TLS ECC P384 Root G5](https://crt.sh/?caid=207460) has the following distinguished name:
        <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
        <code>
        CN=DigiCert TLS ECC P384 Root G5, O="DigiCert, Inc.", C=US
        </code>
        </div>
      - [DigiCert CS RSA4096 Root G5](https://crt.sh/?caid=208332) has the following distinguished name:
        <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
        <code>
        CN=DigiCert CS RSA4096 Root G5, O="DigiCert, Inc.", C=US
        </code>
      - [DigiCert CS ECC P384 Root G5](https://crt.sh/?caid=208331) has the following distinguished name:
        <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
        <code>
        CN=DigiCert CS ECC P384 Root G5, O="DigiCert, Inc.", C=US
        </code>

      Issue: [JDK-8318759](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8318759)

    - [Let's Encrypt ISRG Root X2](https://crt.sh/?caid=183269) has the following distinguished name:
       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=ISRG Root X2, O=Internet Security Research Group, C=US
       </code>
       </div>

      Issue: [JDK-8317374](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8317374)

    - [Telia Root CA v2](https://crt.sh/?caid=109075) has the following distinguished name:
       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=Telia Root CA v2, O=Telia Finland Oyj, C=FI
       </code>
       </div>

      Issue: [JDK-8317373](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8317373)

    - [Certigna Root CA](https://crt.sh/?caid=18456) has the following distinguished name:
       <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
       <code>
       CN=Certigna Root CA, OU=0002 48146308100036, O=Dhimyotis, C=FR
       </code>
       </div>

      Issue: [JDK-8314960](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8314960)

   Each of these root certificates have also been added to the `cacerts`
   keystore in Oracle's JDK 21.0.2, 17.0.10, 11.0.22, 8u401, and 7u411 releases.

### TLS

-   __Additional system properties to control maximum length of client and server certificate chains__

    Additional system properties named
    `jdk.tls.client.maxInboundCertificateChainLength` and
    `jdk.tls.server.maxInboundCertificateChainLength` have been added to
    allow users to control the maximum length of TLS server and client
    certificate chains. These properties provide flexibility by having
    separate properties for client and server configurations.

    On the client side, a user would set
    `jdk.tls.client.maxInboundCertificateChainLength` to an integer value if
    they want to control the maximum size of a server's certificate chain,
    for example:

    ---
        $ java -Djdk.tls.client.maxInboundCertificateChainLength=7 ... <rest of command line>

    ---

    On the server side, a user would set
    `jdk.tls.server.maxInboundCertificateChainLength` to an integer value if
    they want to control the maximum size of a client's certificate chain, for
    example:

    ---
        $ java -Djdk.tls.server.maxInboundCertificateChainLength=5 ... <rest of command line>

    ---

    These properties, if set, override the existing
    `jdk.tls.maxCertificateChainLength` system property. If properties are not
    set, a default of 10 is used for server certificate chains, and 8 for
    client certificate chains.

    Issue: [JDK-8311596](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8311596)

### XML Signature

-   __Support for SHA-3 based RSA signature algorithms__

    The JDK XML Signature implementation now supports XML signatures
    signed with RSA signature algorithms with SHA-3 digests.
    
    Four new standard `SignatureMethod` URIs have also been added:

    - [`SignatureMethod.SHA3_224_RSA_MGF1`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.xml.crypto/javax/xml/crypto/dsig/SignatureMethod.html#SHA3_224_RSA_MGF1):
      the RSA signature algorithm with SHA3-224 and MGF1.
    - [`SignatureMethod.SHA3_256_RSA_MGF1`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.xml.crypto/javax/xml/crypto/dsig/SignatureMethod.html#SHA3_256_RSA_MGF1):
      the RSA signature algorithm with SHA3-256 and MGF1.
    - [`SignatureMethod.SHA3_384_RSA_MGF1`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.xml.crypto/javax/xml/crypto/dsig/SignatureMethod.html#SHA3_384_RSA_MGF1):
      the RSA signature algorithm with SHA3-384 and MGF1.
    - [`SignatureMethod.SHA3_512_RSA_MGF1`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.xml.crypto/javax/xml/crypto/dsig/SignatureMethod.html#SHA3_512_RSA_MGF1):
      the RSA signature algorithm with SHA3-512 and MGF1.

    Issue: [JDK-8319124](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8319124)

### Tools

-   __keytool and jarsigner support for the HSS/LMS signature algorithm__   

    In JDK 21, we added JCE support for the HSS/LMS signature algorithm (see my
    JDK 21 blog for more details).

    In this release, we have extended that functionality by also adding
    HSS/LMS support to the `jarsigner` and `keytool` utilities.

    `jarsigner` now supports signing and verifying JAR files with the
    HSS/LMS algorithm.  `keytool` now supports generating HSS/LMS public
    keypairs.

    Note that the JDK only supports HSS/LMS signature verification, so in
    order to sign JAR files with HSS/LMS, you will need to use a 3rd party
    provider that supports signing. Similarly, in order to generate key pairs
    you will also need to use a 3rd party provider that supports generation
    of HSS/LMS keypairs and a `KeyStore` implementation that can store HSS/LMS
    keys.

    Issue: [JDK-8302233](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8302233)

-   __New security category for the java -XshowSettings option__

    The `java -XshowSettings` option can be used to print useful information
    about the current JDK configuration, such as system properties, VM settings,
    and more. In JDK 22, this option has been enhanced to show details
    about security related configuration.

    - `-XshowSetttings:security` will show all security settings.
    - `-XshowSetttings:security:properties` will show the values of security
       properties.
    - `-XshowSetttings:security:providers` will show the installed security
       providers and ...
    - `-XshowSetttings:security:tls` will show TLS related settings such as ..

    Here are sample runs showing each of these options:

    ---
        $ java -XshowSettings:security:tls
        Security TLS configuration (SunJSSE provider):
        Enabled Protocols:
            TLSv1.3
            TLSv1.2

        Enabled Cipher Suites:
            TLS_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
            TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
            TLS_CHACHA20_POLY1305_SHA256
            TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
            TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
            TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_CHACHA20_POLY1305_SHA256
            TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
            TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_CHACHA20_POLY1305_SHA256
            TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
            TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
            TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_CHACHA20_POLY1305_SHA256
            TLS_DHE_DSS_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
            TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
            TLS_DHE_DSS_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
            TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA384
            TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA384
            TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA256
            TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA256
            TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA256
            TLS_DHE_DSS_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA256
            TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA256
            TLS_DHE_DSS_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA256
            TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
            TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
            TLS_ECDHE_ECDSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
            TLS_ECDHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
            TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
            TLS_DHE_DSS_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
            TLS_DHE_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
            TLS_DHE_DSS_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
            TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_256_GCM_SHA384
            TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_128_GCM_SHA256
            TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA256
            TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA256
            TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_256_CBC_SHA
            TLS_RSA_WITH_AES_128_CBC_SHA
            TLS_EMPTY_RENEGOTIATION_INFO_SCSV

    --- 

    Issue: [JDK-8281658](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8281658)
