---
layout: post
title: JDK 24 Security Enhancements
---

[JDK 24](https://openjdk.java.net/projects/jdk/24/) was released on March 18, 2025!
As with my previous [blogs](https://seanjmullan.org/blog/), I
have compiled a list of what I think are the most interesting and useful
security enhancements in this release.  I have also grouped
them into appropriate categories (crypto, PKI, etc) which should make
it easier to find out what has changed in each specific area.
The [JDK 24 release notes](https://jdk.java.net/24/release-notes)
also contain further details on these and other enhancements.

This is a significant release for Java Security as it contains two new core
quantum-resistant cryptographic algorithms,
[ML-KEM for key encapsulation](https://openjdk.org/jeps/496), and
[ML-DSA for digital signatures](https://openjdk.org/jeps/497). It also
includes a new
[Preview API for Key Derivation Functions](https://openjdk.org/jeps/478), which 
will be an important building block for subsequent Post-Quantum Cryptography
work. This release also [permanently disables the Security Manager](https://openjdk.org/jeps/411).

In addition, JDK 24 includes one other important feature that improves
security but is not part of the security libraries area:

-   [JEP 498](https://openjdk.org/jeps/498): Warn upon Use of Memory-Access Methods in sun.misc.Unsafe

    This JEP issues a warning at run time on the first use of the memory-access
    methods in `sun.misc.Unsafe`. These methods were deprecated for removal in
    JDK 23 in [JEP 471](https://openjdk.org/jeps/471).

## Table of Contents
1. [Crypto](#crypto)
2. [PKI](#pki)
3. [TLS](#tls)
4. [Security Manager](#securitymanager)
5. [Miscellaneous](#miscellaneous)


### Crypto

-   __JEP 496: Quantum-Resistant Module-Lattice-Based Key Encapsulation Mechanism__

    The `SunJCE` provider now supports the quantum-resistant ML-KEM
    key encapsulation mechanism. This mechanism is specified in 
    [FIPS 203](https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/fips/203/final), and is
    based on lattices. New `KeyPairGenerator`, `KeyFactory`, and `KEM`
    implementations for ML-KEM have been added. Three parameter sets in
    increasing strength are supported: ML-KEM-512, ML-KEM-768, and ML-KEM-1024.

    Here is an example which uses ML-KEM to establish a shared secret key
    between two parties, a sender and a receiver.

    ---

        // The receiver generates an ML-KEM-768 key pair
        KeyPairGenerator kpg = KeyPairGenerator.getInstance("ML-KEM");
        kpg.initialize(NamedParameterSpec.ML_KEM_768);
        KeyPair kp = kpg.genKeyPair();

        // The sender generates a key encapsulation message and secret key from the receiver’s public key
        KEM kem = KEM.getInstance("ML-KEM");
        KEM.Encapsulator enc = kem.newEncapsulator(kp.getPublicKey());
        KEM.Encapsulated encap = enc.encapsulate();
        SecretKey skey = encap.key();
        byte[] msg = encap.encapsulation(); // send this to the receiver

        // The sender then sends the encapsulated message to the receiver
        // (this part is not shown)

        // The receiver decapsulates the key encapsulation message with its private key to obtain the secret key
        byte[] msg = …; // received from sender
        KEM kem = KEM.getInstance("ML-KEM");
        KEM.Decapsulator dec = kem.newDecapsulator(kp.getPrivateKey());
        SecretKey skey = dec.decapsulate(msg);

    ---

    The `keytool` utility also supports generating ML-KEM key pairs. Here is
    an example of generating an ML-KEM key pair and certificate:

    ---

        $ keytool -keystore ks -storepass changeit \
               -genkeypair -alias ec -keyalg EC \
               -dname CN=EC -ext bc
        Generating 384-bit EC (secp384r1) key pair and self-signed certificate (SHA384withECDSA) with a validity of 90 days
	        for: CN=EC

        $ keytool -keystore ks -storepass changeit \
                -genkeypair -alias mlkem -keyalg ML-KEM \
                -groupname ML-KEM-768 -dname CN=ML-KEM \
                -signer ec
        Generating ML-KEM-768 key pair and a certificate (SHA384withECDSA) issued by <ec> with a validity of 90 days
	        for: CN=ML-KEM

    ---

    Note that in order to create the certificate, we need a different key to
    sign the certificate because ML-KEM itself is not a signature algorithm.

    The first command creates an EC key pair and self-signed certificate
    and the second command creates an ML-KEM-768 key pair and a certificate
    signed by the EC key. 

    JEP: [496: Quantum-Resistant Module-Lattice-Based Key Encapsulation Mechanism](https://openjdk.org/jeps/496)

-   __JEP 497: Quantum-Resistant Module-Lattice-Based Digital Signature Algorithm__

    The `SUN` provider now supports the quantum-resistant ML-DSA
    signature algorithm. This algorithm is specified in 
    [FIPS 204](https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/fips/203/final), and is
    based on lattices. New `KeyPairGenerator`, `KeyFactory`, and `Signature`
    implementations for ML-DSA have been added. Three parameter sets in
    increasing strength are supported: ML-DSA-44, ML-DSA-65, and ML-DSA-87.

    Using ML-DSA in your applications is very similar to other signature
    algorithms. Here is an example which uses ML-DSA to sign and verify
    a message:

    ---

        // The signer generates an ML-DSA-65 key pair
        KeyPairGenerator kpg = KeyPairGenerator.getInstance("ML-DSA");
        kpg.initialize(NamedParameterSpec.ML_DSA_65);
        KeyPair kp = kpg.genKeyPair();

        // The signer signs a message using its private key
        Signature sig = Signature.getInstance("ML-DSA");
        sig.initSign(kp.getPrivate());
        sig.update(message);
        byte[] signature = sig.sign();

        // The signer then sends the signed message to the verifier
        // (this part is not shown)

        // The verifier verifies the message using the signer’s public key
        // (which in this case is in an X.509 certificate)
        Signature sig = Signature.getInstance("ML-DSA");
        sig.initVerify(signerCert);
        sig.update(message);
        assert sig.verify(signature);

    ---

    The `keytool` utility also supports generating ML-DSA key pairs. Here is
    an example of generating an ML-DSA key pair and certificate:

    ---

        $ keytool -keystore ks -storepass changeit \
                -genkeypair -alias mldsa -keyalg ML-DSA \
                -groupname ML-DSA-65 -dname CN=ML-DSA
        Generating ML-DSA-65 key pair and self-signed certificate (ML-DSA-65) with a validity of 90 days
	        for: CN=ML-DSA

    ---

    This command creates an ML-DSA-65 key pair and a self-signed certificate.

    JEP: [497: Quantum-Resistant Module-Lattice-Based Digital Signature Algorithm](https://openjdk.org/jeps/497)

-   __JEP 478: Key Derivation Function API (Preview)__

    A new preview API for deriving keys from key material has been introduced
    in this release and is more fully described in 
    [JEP 478](https://openjdk.org/jeps/478). It includes an implementation of
    the HMAC-based Extract-and-Expand Key Derivation Function (HKDF), which is
    defined in [RFC 5869](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5869.html).

    KDF will be a very valuable API for several future enhancements that
    depend on key derivation. These include PQC mechanisms such as TLS
    Hybrid Key Exchange in TLS 1.3
    ([IETF Draft](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-tls-hybrid-design/))
    and Hybrid Public Key Encryption
    ([RFC 9180](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9180.html)). The API is also
    designed to be used for strong and modern password-based algorithms such
    as Argon2.

    The main new class is `javax.crypto.KDF`. The JEP gives an example of
    using the HKDF-SHA256 algorithm to derive a 32 byte AES key:

    ---

        // Create a KDF object for the specified algorithm
        KDF hkdf = KDF.getInstance("HKDF-SHA256"); 

        // Create an ExtractExpand parameter specification
        AlgorithmParameterSpec params =
            HKDFParameterSpec.ofExtract()
                     .addIKM(initialKeyMaterial)
                     .addSalt(salt).thenExpand(info, 32);

        // Derive a 32-byte AES key
        SecretKey key = hkdf.deriveKey("AES", params);

    ---

    JEP: [478: Key Derivation Function API (Preview)](https://openjdk.org/jeps/478)

-   __Standard Hash and MGF Algorithm Names Defined for RSASSA-PSS Signatures__

    A new [PSSParameterSpec section](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/24/docs/specs/security/standard-names.html#pssparameterspec)
    has been added to the Java Security Standard Algorithm Names Specification
    listing the standard hash and MGF (Message Generation Function)
    algorithms that can be specified when instantiating a
    [`java.security.spec.PSSParameterSpec`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/24/docs/api/java.base/java/security/spec/PSSParameterSpec.html#%3Cinit%3E(java.lang.String,java.lang.String,java.security.spec.AlgorithmParameterSpec,int,int)) object.

    Issue: [JDK-8248981](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8248981)

-   __SHA3 Performance Improved__

    The performance of the SHA3 `MessageDigest` implementations has improved
    by 6% to 27%, depending on the platform and the length of the message
    digest. This performance improvement applies to the SHA3-224, SHA3-256,
    SHA3-384, and SHA3-512 algorithms. An additional 30-40% can be experienced
    on AVX-512 capable platforms due to new intrinsic implementations on that
    platform. 

    Issue: [JDK-8333867](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8333867)

-   __PKCS#11 Support for AES CTS (Ciphertext Stealing) Mode__

    The `SunPKCS11` provider has been enhanced to support AES Ciphertext
    Stealing mode, if the configured PKCS#11 token supports it. The
    "AES/CTS/NoPadding", "AES_128/CTS/NoPadding", "AES_192/CTS/NoPadding",
    and "AES_256/CTS/NoPadding" `Cipher` algorithms are supported.

    The PKCS#11 `cipherTextStealingVariant` attribute should be set to
    the CTS variant used by the PKCS#11 implementation. These correspond
    to the 3 variants defined by NIST SP 800-38A: `CS1`, `CS2`, and `CS3`.
    If NSS is used as the PKCS#11 implementation, it automatically sets it
    to `CS1`. If this attribute is not set, the CTS modes are disabled by
    default.

    Issue: [JDK-8330842](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8330842)

### PKI

-   __New Root CA Certificates__

    Several new root CA certificates have been added to the `cacerts` keystore:

    - Two SSL.com root CA certificates
      - [SSL.com TLS ECC Root CA 2022](https://crt.sh/?id=7439766705) has the following distinguished name:  
          <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
          <code>
          CN=SSL.com TLS ECC Root CA 2022, O=SSL Corporation, C=US
          </code>
          </div>
      - [SSL.com TLS RSA Root CA 2022](https://crt.sh/?id=7439767372) has the following distinguished name:  
          <div style="background-color:rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.0470588); text-align:left; text-indent:25px; padding:10px 0;">
          <code>
          CN=SSL.com TLS RSA Root CA 2022, O=SSL Corporation, C=US
          </code>
          </div>

      These root certificates have also been added to the `cacerts`
      keystore in Oracle's JDK 23.0.1, 21.0.5, 17.0.13, 11.0.25, and 8u431 releases.

      Issue: [JDK-8341057](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8341057)

### TLS

-   __New Wildcard Mechanism for Disabling TLS Cipher Suites__

    The `jdk.tls.disabledAlgorithms` security property has been enhanced to
    support disabling TLS cipher suites using a wildcard syntax. This
    new syntax allows you to more easily disable more than one cipher suite.
    For example, `TLS_RSA_*` would disable all cipher suites starting with
    "TLS_RSA_". Only cipher suites starting with "TLS_" can be disabled using
    this mechanism.

    Issue: [JDK-8341964](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8341964)

-   __Entrust TLS Server Certificates Distrusted__

    The JDK will no longer trust TLS Server certificates issued by Entrust.
    The list of affected certificates includes certificates branded as Entrust
    and AffirmTrust, which was managed by Entrust. TLS Server certificates
    issued on or before November 11, 2024 will continue to be trusted until
    they expire. Certificates issued after that date will be rejected. See
    the [release note](https://jdk.java.net/24/release-notes#JDK-8337664) for
    more information and a list of Certificate Authorities that are affected.

    This change has already been made in Oracle's JDK 23.0.1, 21.0.5, 17.0.13,
    11.0.25, and 8u431 releases.

    Issue: [JDK-8337664](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8337664)

-   __TLS_RSA Cipher Suites Disabled by Default__

    The TLS_RSA cipher suites are now disabled by default. These cipher suites
    do not preserve forward secrecy and [RFC 9325](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9325)
    recommends that they should not be used. This change disables any cipher
    suite starting with "TLS_RSA_".

    Users can re-enable these cipher suites, at their own risk, by removing
    "TLS_RSA_*" from the `jdk.tls.disabledAlgorithms` security property in the
    `java.security` configuration file.

    Issue: [JDK-8245545](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8245545)

### Security Manager

-   __Permanently Disable the Security Manager__

    In JDK 17, the Security Manager was deprecated for removal via JEP 411.
    This included the `java.lang.SecurityManager` API and several APIs related
    to the Security Manager.

    In this release, we have taken the next major step and permanently
    disabled the Security Manager. It is no longer possible to enable a
    Security Manager at startup on the command line, or at run time by
    calling `System.setSecurityManager`. The Security Manager
    related APIs have been degraded to be non-functional or to behave as
    in prior releases when a Security Manager was not enabled.

    Developers should take action to remove dependencies on the Security
    Manager, if applicable. There are several methods you can use to
    determine if your code is dependent on the Security Manager:

      - Check scripts or documentation for Security Manager references
      - Run the application on one of JDK 17 through 23 and look for
        deprecation warnings on the console
      - Run the application on one of JDK 17 through 23 with the command-line
        option `-Djava.security.manager=disallow`. If the code is dynamically
        setting a Security Manager, it will throw an
        `UnsupportedOperationException`.
      - Use the `jdeprscan` tool on JDK 17 or later to scan for uses of
        deprecated Security Manager APIs

    The JVM will exit with a fatal error at startup if an application is run
    with a Security Manager, ex:

    ---

        java –Djava.security.manager MyApp

        Error occurred during initialization of VM
        java.lang.Error: A command line option has attempted to allow or enable the Security Manager. Enabling a Security Manager is not supported.
                at java.lang.System.initPhase3(java.base@24-internal/System.java:2067)

    ---

    If an application enables a Security Manager at run time, an
    `UnsupportedOperationException` will be thrown, ex:

    ---

        java MyApp
        
        Exception in thread "main" java.lang.UnsupportedOperationException: Setting a Security Manager is not supported
                at java.base/java.lang.System.setSecurityManager(System.java:320)
                ...

    ---

    Libraries supporting the Security Manager typically use one or two common
    coding patterns, ex:

    ---

        // checking permissions
        SecurityManager sm = System.getSecurityManager();
        if (sm != null) {
            sm.checkPermission(...);
        }

        // asserting privileges
        SomeType v = AccessController.doPrivileged(
            (PrivilegedAction<SomeType>)() -> {
                ...
                return theResult;
        });

    ---

    These methods will behave the same as in previous JDK releases when a
    Security Manager was not enabled: `System.getSecurityManager` will always
    return `null` and `AccessController.doPrivileged` will execute the action
    immediately.

    A small number of applications or libraries use advanced parts of the
    Security Manager APIs, ex: `AccessController::checkPermission` to check
    permissions directly, or `Policy::setPolicy` to use a custom policy
    implementation.

    These APIs, among others, have been degraded to throw exceptions or
    provide an execution environment that disallows access to all resources by
    default.

    For applications that use JAAS, `Subject.getSubject` has been changed to
    always throw `UnsupportedOperationException`. This API depends on the
    terminally deprecated `AccessControlContext` API. Replacement APIs were
    added in JDK 18. If using this API, you must replace calls to
    `Subject.getSubject` with `Subject.current` and you should replace calls
    to `Subject.doAs` with `Subject.callAs`.

    See the [CSR](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8266577) for a complete list of API changes.

    In a future release the Security Manager APIs will be removed.

    JEP: [486: Permanently Disable the Security Manager](https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/411)

### Miscellaneous

-   __Support for Including Security Properties Files__

    The `java.security` security properties file now supports including
    other properties files. A new `include <file>` directive can be added
    to include another properties file. The effect of including a file is
    equivalent to defining its properties inline at the inclusion point.
    This feature is very useful for defining different property files
    that can be included based on different security profiles.

    For more information and examples, see the
    [Security Properties Files Inclusion section](https://docs-uat.us.oracle.com/en/java/javase/24/security/security-properties-file.html#GUID-FF09EB34-CD27-4D1B-B55B-A4A4E6A0F039)
    of the Security Developer Guide.

    Issue: [JDK-8319332](https://bugs.openjdk.org/browse/JDK-8319332)
